docs: add application structure explanation (#910)
canonical/craft-application: docs/explanation/structure.rst

.. _explanation_structure:

Structure of an application
===========================

A Craft application has several sections that represent its structure, all glued
together by the :py:class:`~craft_application.application.Application` class, which
is primarily responsible for setup and teardown.

``Application``
---------------

The :py:class:`~craft_application.application.Application` is the glue that holds a

> Craft app together.  The ``Application`` is primarily responsible for starting up the

Author: Not AFAIK. My primary reason for using it here was to distinguish from the Application class. I'm open to suggestions.

okay uploading the project to a public git repository. In addition to that interactive
item, it provides a way to do this non-interactively via
``--launchpad-accept-public-upload``. It is supported by a remote build service that
provides the actual business logic, but the user interface is primarily driven
by the Command.

Services
--------

:doc:`/reference/services/index` are the primary location for a Craft application's
business logic. They are responsible for:

1. Implementing logic related to a specific workflow or piece of data.
2. Maintaining relevant internal state for that (assisted by the
   :py:class:`~craft_application.services.state.StateService` if the state needs to
   be passed between a manager instance and a managed instance of the application).
3. Acting as wrappers for any external libraries that get used (with a few exceptions).

.. caution::

    Avoid storing data from one service in another. Services may update data by
    replacing an existing object rather than mutating it. Unless stated otherwise, each
    call to a service should be treated as invalidating any cached items retrieved
    from that service.

> 

Author: I don't currently think this is helpful, but I'm leaving it open for discussion.

> 

Reviewer: Begone, amorphous beast.

modify the project model (for example,
:py:meth:`~craft_application.services.project.ProjectService.deep_update`).

The ``ProjectService`` is also responsible for loading the project file, parsing
the YAML, performing pre-processing on it, and rendering a
:ref:`reference-models-project` model. Additional project-related features should be
implemented by extending this service, not with ad-hoc logic in other places.

A service that implements workflow-related logic and acts as a wrapper for an external
library is the :py:class:`~craft_application.services.provider.ProviderService`, which
provides relevant hooks into :external+craft-providers:doc:`index`. This service
contains both global state (e.g. packages and snaps to install in a managed instance)
and per-instance state (e.g. the actual ``instance`` from Craft Providers).

Services may interact with each other, but it is strongly recommended that they only do
so at a high level in order to avoid too much complexity. This includes the fact that
services should default to using protected (underscore-prefixed) methods unless it is
specifically known that a method must be externally available. Likewise, when possible

> a Command should only interact with a service on a high level.

Author: Because I re-read that last sentence and decided it needed it but didn't re-read the whole paragraph. But now I don't think it needs it.

```suggestion
a command should only interact with a service on a high level.
```

A Command is primarily responsible for user interaction. It should:

1. Take parameters for every option, which can be set interactively (i.e. from
   the CLI) or non-interactively (i.e. from a script).
2. If an option is not provided, ask the user or provide a reasonable default.
3. Return final information to the user.

To do all of this, it is supported by :external+craft-cli:doc:`Craft CLI <index>`,
the application's metadata, and the
:py:class:`~craft_application.ServiceFactory`. The ``ServiceFactory``
is accessible at ``self._services``, while the app's metadata is accessible at
``self._app``.

Interactive functionality should generally be implemented within a Command.
One such example is the ``remote-build`` command, which asks the user to confirm
that they are okay uploading the project to a public git repository. In addition to
that interactive item, it provides a way to do this non-interactively via
``--launchpad-accept-public-upload``. It is supported by a remote build service that
provides the actual business logic, but the user interface is primarily driven
by the Command.

Services
--------

> :doc:`/reference/services/index` are the primary location for a Craft application's

Author: Not sure I can be more concrete, but maybe more prescriptive helps?

> :doc:`/reference/services/index` are where an app's business logic lives.

> :doc:`/reference/services/index` are the primary location for a Craft application's

Reviewer: Let's go with that.

business logic. They are responsible for:

1. Implementing logic related to a specific workflow or piece of data.
2. Maintaining relevant internal state for that (assisted by the
   :py:class:`~craft_application.services.state.StateService` if the state needs to

>    be passed between application instances running inside and outside of an 

Author: ```suggestion
   be passed between application instances running inside and outside of an
```

together by the :py:class:`~craft_application.application.Application` class, which
is primarily responsible for setup and teardown.

``Application``
---------------

The :py:class:`~craft_application.application.Application` is the glue that holds a
Craft app together.  The ``Application`` is primarily responsible for starting up the
app, loading the relevant services and calling the relevant Command. It also handles
exceptions and turns them into error messages.

In an ideal world, ``Application`` would never need to have child
classes. Each thing the ``Application`` currently does that requires an override in a
craft can be considered a shortcoming to be fixed at a later date. In practice,
however, this is not always feasible.

Commands
--------

A Command is a child class of :py:class:`craft_application.commands.AppCommand` that
gets registered with the ``Application`` by using its
:py:meth:`~craft_application.application.Application.add_command_group` method.
A Command is primarily responsible for user interaction. It should:

1. Take parameters for every option, which can be set interactively (i.e. from

>    the CLI) or non-interactively (i.e. from a script)
>    option the command may need.

Reviewer 2: My earlier suggestion that you accepted didn't properly delete the trailing bit of the sentence on the next line.
```suggestion
   the CLI) or non-interactively (i.e. from a script).
```

Structure of an application
===========================

A Craft application has several sections that represent its structure, all glued
together by the :py:class:`~craft_application.application.Application` class, which
is primarily responsible for setup and teardown.

``Application``
---------------

The :py:class:`~craft_application.application.Application` is the glue that holds a
Craft app together. In an ideal world, ``Application`` would never need to have child
classes. Each thing the ``Application`` currently does that requires an override in a
craft can be considered a shortcoming to be fixed at a later date. In practice,
however, this is not always feasible.

The ``Application`` is primarily responsible for starting up the app, loading
the relevant services, and calling the relevant Command. It also handles exceptions
and turns them into error messages.

Commands
--------

A Command is a child class of :py:class:`craft_application.commands.AppCommand` that
gets registered with the ``Application`` by using its
:py:meth:`~craft_application.application.Application.add_command_group` method.
A Command is primarily responsible for user interaction. It should:

> 1. Take parameters that let the caller (be it a user or a script) configure every

Author: I'm talking about the caller of the application. The purpose here is to lay out that anything interactive should have a way to override it to make the command non-interactive.

> 1. Take parameters that let the caller (be it a user or a script) configure every

Reviewer 2: Then I would say that explicitly, perhaps like:
```suggestion
1. Take parameters for every option, which can be set interactively (i.e. from the CLI) or non-interactively (i.e. from a script)
```

   option the command may need.
2. If an option is not provided, ask the user or provide a reasonable default.
3. Return final information to the user.

To do all of this, it is supported by :external+craft-cli:doc:`Craft CLI <index>`,
the application's metadata, and the
:py:class:`~craft_application.ServiceFactory`. The ``ServiceFactory``
is accessible at ``self._services``, while the app's metadata is accessible at
``self._app``.

> A Command is the primary place where interactivity is provided. One such example

Reviewer 2: This is oddly close to the earlier sentence "A Command is primarily responsible for user interaction" but is trying to convey something different. Maybe rephrase:
```suggestion
An interactive feature should generally be implemented as a Command. One such example
```

Author: It's not that it needs to be its own command, but rather that other parts of the application should, as much as feasible, not provide that interaction.

If the user needs to be asked a question, a Command should be doing it - there shouldn't be a method in a service that asks that question.

Reviewer 2: How about: "interactive functionality should generally be implemented within a Command." No implication there that any new commands be created.

is the ``remote-build`` command, which asks the user to confirm that they are
okay uploading the project to a public git repository. In addition to that interactive
item, it provides a way to do this non-interactively via
``--launchpad-accept-public-upload``. It is supported by a remote build service that
provides the actual business logic, but the user interface is primarily driven
by the Command.

Services
--------

:doc:`/reference/services/index` are the primary location for a Craft application's
business logic. They are responsible for:

1. Implementing logic related to a specific workflow or piece of data.
2. Maintaining relevant internal state for that (assisted by the
   :py:class:`~craft_application.services.state.StateService` if the state needs to

>    be passed between a manager instance and a managed instance of the application).

Author: That's more of a craft application concept than a craft providers concept. Unfortunately, we don't have docs about that distinction (yet).

3. Acting as wrappers for any external libraries that get used (with a few exceptions).

A prime example of this is the :doc:`/reference/services/project`, which is the sole
provider of information about the loaded project. The contract of the ``ProjectService``

> is such that an instance of a project model may be disposed and replaced, so a command

Author: This document is meant for someone who already has a fairly basic grasp of what each of these is, so I ordered it in this way so people move in a flow of User -> business logic -> data structure. I'm worried that ordering it that way would be jarring going from the application to the models.

> is such that an instance of a project model may be disposed and replaced, so a command

Reviewer 2: If that's consistent with other similar documentation, then I'm fine leaving it as-is. I'll leave it to the TAs to opine on which is preferable.

> is such that an instance of a project model may be disposed and replaced, so a command

Author: I'm definitely open to ordering suggestions here that improve the flow.

or another service must not keep a project model instance, but instead request the
project through the ``ProjectService`` in each method or after each call that may
modify the project model (for example,
:py:meth:`~craft_application.services.project.ProjectService.deep_update`).

The ``ProjectService`` is also responsible for loading the project file, parsing
the YAML, performing pre-processing on it, and rendering a
:ref:`reference-models-project` model. Additional project-related features should be

> implemented by extending this service, not with ad-hoc logic in other places.

Author: I mean extending by adding more methods.

A service that implements workflow-related logic and acts as a wrapper for an external
library is the :py:class:`~craft_application.services.provider.ProviderService`, which
provides relevant hooks into :external+craft-providers:doc:`index`. This service
contains both global state (e.g. packages and snaps to install in a managed instance)
and per-instance state (e.g. the actual ``instance`` from Craft Providers).

Services may interact with each other, but it is strongly recommended that they only do
so at a high level in order to avoid too much complexity. This includes the fact that
services should default to using protected (underscore-prefixed) methods unless it is
specifically known that a method must be externally available. Likewise, when possible

> a Command should only interact with a service on a high level.

Author: I thought that my ~~screed~~ explanation had made that clear. Should I maybe put some sort of admonishment after the responsibilities of the service about that?
